THE AUSTRALIAN MARS EXPLORATION 
CONFERENCE

 

THE AUSTRALIAN MARS EXPLORATION 
CONFERENCE

 
 

Conference
Program



Time
Speaker
Topic









































Mobile Robot Navigation on Mars

Professor Ray Jarvis 

This paper looks at some of the issues concerning the physical 
architectures, sensors and artificial intelligence associated with mobile 
robot navigation, both of an entirely autonomous kind and of a so called 
tele-autonomous variety, particularly in the context of the exploration of 
Mars. 

Professor Ray Jarvis completed his BE (Elec.) and Ph.D. (Elec.) at the 
University of Western Australia in 1962 and 1968, respectively. 

After two year at Purdue University he was appointed to the Australian 
National University (ANU) to teach Computer Science. There he was 
instrumental in establishing the Department of Computer Science at ANU, 
and was its first Head of Department. 

He joined Monash University in 1985 and established the Intelligent Robotic 
Research Centre in 1987. He has been the Centre's Director since then. 
His research interests are in Computer Vision and Robotics. Both robotic 
manipulators and mobile robots of various sizes have been part of his 
interests. Most recently he has been working on autonomous and 
teleoperated vehicles and vessels including a tacked vehicle, several boats, 
an amphibious craft, an excavator and a half scale Russian built Martian 
Rover. He has also recently developed a research interest in Humanoid 
Robotics. From an AI perceptive his main interests are in Computer Vision 
and Path Planning. 


The Mars Society Australia's Technical Program

Mr Jason Hoogland

The Mars Society Australia's Technical Programme consists of five 
projects, collectively known as Operation Red Centre. 

Project Jarntimarra will involve experts in various scientific disciplines 
including geology and microbiology developing a valuable electronic 
database containing comprehensive information on Australian Mars 
Analogue sites.  

In 2000 Mars Society Australia was one of three international groups 
awarded seed funding to develop a "flight-like" Mars rover vehicle to 
undertake unique analogue research.  Project Marsupial is constructing a 
family of vehicles intended to assist with the design of future Mars rovers.  
The Human Operations Prototype (HOP) is the first vehicle in the series.  

Analogue simulation depends on subjecting crew members to the same 
kinds of constraints expected for human crews on the surface of Mars.  A 
key element of Operation Red Centre is therefore a Mars analogue surface 
suit.  Project Mars Skin will apply the latest research in such systems to 
develop realistic Mars suits for use in analogue research activities.  

The international Mars Society has established a research station on arctic 
Devon Island.  The facility is designed to be "flight-like", similar to the kind 
of planetary entry, descent and landing habitats used in leading humans-to-
Mars mission proposals andallow realistic simulations to help test mission 
planning hypotheses.  It is proposed that three additional stations around 
the world will be built, including a Mars Australian Research Station (Mars-
Oz).   

Mars Society Australia will operate a communications payload aboard an 
Australian satellite Jaesat in 2002, a key component of the Store and 
Forward Mars Analogue Research System (SAFMARS) project.  

Jason Hoogland is a 28 year old Phd candidate in Mechanical Engineering 
at the University of Queensland.  His Doctoral thesis is investigating the 
aerothermodynamic influence of ablative injection on superorbital entry heat 
shield flowfields.  This involves novel simulation of the vapourisation of 
these kinds of thermal protection systems in the hypersonic expansion 
tubes at the Centre for Hypersonics, focussing on the heat shield of the 
Japanese Muses-C asteroid sample return mission scheduled to launch in 
2002.  Prior to this he worked as a Graduate Engineer with the Robe River 
Mining Company, based in Perth.  His work involved R&D on vibrational 
removal of fines from lump iron ore, and project management of a $9 million 
Lump Rescreening Plant.  Jason has a BE (mech, Hons) from teh 
University of Western Australia and a BSc (physics) from the University of 
Melbourne.


Antarctica as an Analogue for Mars
Dr John Webb
Antarctica has been used as an analogue for Mars in terms of its physical 
environment and also in terms of the social interactions between the people 
in the small groups who work there. The ice-free areas of Antarctica (so-
called 'oases') are similar to the surface of Mars in that they are arid 
deserts, characterised by very low temperatures and humidities and very 
windy conditions, although of course the atmospheric pressure is much 
higher and the atmospheric composition different. Weathering of the rocks 
exposed in Antarctica is dominated by physical processes, e.g. wind 
erosion and salt wedging, and the same is likely to be true on Mars, 
although salt wedging is probably absent. Downslope movement of regolith 
in Antarctica is dominated by debris flows and slumping in the water-
saturated material overlying the permafrost in summer, and has been 
regarded by some workers as analogous to the processes forming 
apparently active gullies near the Martian poles, although this is arguable.
Any human exploration of Mars will be based around small parties, isolated 
for long periods, undertaking field work from a base, and therefore 
resembles the current practices in Antarctica. Studies of the social 
interactions between personnel in Antarctica give insights into likely 
problems that could arise on Mars, particularly conflicts due to differences 
in background (scientific/military), age and gender. Particularly at bases, 
social problems can be more important than the physical demands of the 
surrounding hostile environment.
Environmental concerns that have recently become important in Antarctica 
may also be applicable to Mars, particularly the removal or disposal of all 
waste.
I attended Queensland University, where I obtained my Honours (with a 
University Medal) and PhD degrees (the latter in 1982). My thesis was on 
Triassic palaeobotany of southeastern Queensland, but since completing it 
my interests have broadened, to include geomorphology and Antarctic 
geology. After finishing my thesis I taught for 5 years at Melbourne 
University Geology Department, then moved to La Trobe University Earth 
Sciences in 1985, where I teach sedimentology and environmental geology. 
At the moment I'm Head of Department. Over the summer of 1989-1990 I 
went to Antarctica for a field season in the northern Prince Charles 
Mountains, studying Permo-Triassic sedimentology and the recent 
geomorphology.
Earth Analogues for Martian Environments
Prof Malcolm Walter
Places such as Devon Island are analogues for the present environment of 
Mars. But another category of analogues is also important: those places 
that resemble ancient environments that might have hosted life, such as 
former lakes and thermal springs.  In Australia we have numerous such 
places, including gold deposits in central Queensland,  a giant lead-zinc-
silver deposit in the NT, Mount Painter in SA, and many sites in WA. Some 
of these are also analogues for aspects of the current environment on 
Mars. Mt Painter is one such; it is one of the World's largest ancient thermal 
spring systems, has an active thermal spring nearby, and is flanked by arid 
plains, dunes and salt lakes. It is an excellent site for conducting simulation 
experiments.
Malcolm Walter is Adjunct Professor of geology at Macquarie University in 
Sydney, Director of the Australian Centre for Astrobiology based at that 
university,  and Director of M. R. Walter Pty Ltd. He has worked for 35 
years on the geological evidence of early life on Earth, including the earliest 
convincing evidence of life. Since 1989 he has been funded by NASA in 
their "exobiology" and "astrobiology" programs, focussing on microbial life 
in high temperature ecosystems, and the search for life on Mars. During 
1999 his book "The Search for Life on Mars" was published by Allen & 
Unwin. He has published more than 100 articles and several other books. 
He also works as an oil exploration consultant and a consultant to 
museums, and is currently curator of a special Centenary of Federation 
exhibition on space exploration (for the new Museum of Australia in 
Canberra, Museum Victoria, and elsewhere).


Novel nano-organisms (Nanobes): living 
analogues for Martian "nanobacteria"?
Dr Philippa Uwins
On August 7th 1996 NASA made the historic announcement that Martian 
Meteorite ALH84001 could contain evidence for past life on Mars. Central 
to the thesis, and perhaps the most controversial aspect of the findings, 
were the fossil remnants of sub-bacteria sized "cells" called nannobacteria. 
While the results were of great scientific interest they fuelled a fierce and 
highly contentious debate, not only concerning the existence of Martian 
microbes, but a controversy surrounding the minimum possible size of life 
on earth. 
The identification and existence of nanobacteria was not new and had been 
proposed previously by a number of workers. However, the likelihood of 
such small cells existing was strongly questioned, since it was argued that 
these cells would have been far too small to carry out the metabolic and 
reproductive processes essential for life. It has remained unresolved to this 
day whether these mineralised nannobacteria were fossilised remnants of 
independent life forms, artefacts of sample preparation or unusual mineral 
deposits.

However, more recently, we reported on the existence of novel nano-
organisms (nanobes) growing on Triassic and Jurassic sandstones 
collected from petroleum exploration boreholes offshore Western Australia. 
These filamentous, pleomorphic and yeast-like cells provide further 
evidence for nano-scopic life. Because these cells were so much smaller 
than any known microbe, they were given the name 'nanobe'. 

Nanobes will be described, illustrated and discussed within the context of 
the nanobacterial debate. If nanobes are novel life forms as claimed, how 
will their existence impact on our understanding of three fundamental 
questions, What is life? How did it evolve? and Is there life beyond earth?

BIO: Dr Philippa Uwins is a Senior Research Fellow at The University of 
Queensland, Centre for Microscopy and Microanalysis. She has a degree in 
Geology from the University of Edinburgh (1982), and a Ph.D in Palynology 
(the study of organic microfossils) from the University of Aberdeen (1987). 
She then worked for one year at Robertson Research International's head 
office in North Wales as a palynologist. She has been at the University of 
Queensland, Centre for Microscopy and Microanalysis since 1989. Her 
research has focussed on phytoplankton ecology and water quality 
monitoring, clay mineralogy, catalyst chemistry, microscopy research and 
techniques (specialising in Environmental Scanning Electron Microscopy 
(ESEM) and ultra-high resolution Field Emission SEM (FESEM)). More 
recently her work has focussed on the molecular, morphological and 
ultrastructural characterisation of novel nano-organisms called nanobes.


White Mars
Dr Nick Hoffman
On Earth, life requires water, therefore our search for life beyond the Earth 
is a search for water. For this reason we target Europa, a moon of Jupiter that may 
have a liquid ocean beneath a thick icy crust, and also Mars where huge erosional 
channels suggest the flow of fluids across the surface in the geological past. Many 
scientists believe that rivers and lakes existed in the past on Mars, and perhaps 
even oceans. However, this search on Mars may be ill-founded. Despite intense 
research, the evidence for water on Mars is scarce. Now a new theory suggests 
that the single strongest line of evidence for water on Mars - the "outburst flood 
channels" may have been formed not by liquid water but by cold dry eruptions of 
gas, dust and rock, fuelled by exploding liquid CO2.
Nick obtained his B.Sc. in Geophysics from Edinburgh University, Scotland in 
1980, graduating with 1st class Honours. He then moved to Cambridge University 
where he completed a Ph.D. in 1983 on the topic of numerical studies of Mantle 
Convection and Geochemical Mixing. After Cambridge, Nick entered the Oil 
Industry, working for Britoil in Glasgow. Commencing in the Production & 
Development division and moving progressively to Exploration and New Ventures 
he worked on a variety of assignments in and around the North Sea. In 1991, Nick 
moved to Melbourne Australia to join BHP Petroleum's Asia Division.  He left BHP 
in 1999 and joined the active structural geology group at La Trobe University in 
Melbourne to carry out Geological Research on extensional basins and 
compressional margins of Australia, Indonesia, & New Guinea . 


Dr Robert Zubrin
Robert Zubrin, formerly a Staff Engineer at Lockheed Martin Astronautics in 
Denver is now president of his own company, Pioneer Astronautics.  He holds 
Masters degrees in Aeronautics and Astronautics and a doctorate in Nuclear 
Engineering.  He is the inventor of several unique concepts for space propulsion 
and exploration, the author of over 100 published technical and non-technical 
papers in the field, as well the book "The Case for Mars: The Plan to Settle the 
Red Planet and Why We Must" published by the Free Press.  He is a Fellow of the 
British Interplanetary Society and Senior Vice President of the National Space 
Society. Most recently, he founded the Mars Society; an international organization 
dedicated to furthering the exploration and settlement of Mars by both public and 
private means.  Prior to his work in astronautics, Dr. Zubrin was employed in areas 
of thermonuclear fusion research, nuclear engineering, radiation protection, and as 
a high school science teacher.

