Some Features
-------------

Bubble forward window* - blown acrylic, may require one further segmentation so raw acrycllic sheets can fit in largest plastics oven in Brisbane.  The central feature of the design is this forward dome, which seeks to minimize viewing obstructions.

Tray* - can carry ATV and other items, fold-down side walls.  I envisage special containers which can be attached to mounting points on the tray top for sample stowage when ATV not carried on sortie.  Provides significant sample stowage potential.

Winch - rear mounted (allows faulty ATV to be raised), rear mounting also useable for rescue.  Located beneath door in tray floor.

Twin egress doors* - both the HOP-W and HOP-U feature these, however size restrictions in the utility result in slightly different sized doors for different purposes.

Dust room* - again, featured in both vehicles.  Can be regarded as an airlock, however this is not the sole design purpose.  The dust room ensures all Mars environmental contaminants remain excluded from shirt sleeves area.  We'll see how well this can be made to work in practice.

Suitports* - hard suitport doors, two only in Ute, possible space for extra (spare) in HOP-W.  HOP design will be sprongboard for commencement of Project Mars Skin.

RMA - Remote Manipulator Arm on both vehicles, mounted on "passenger" side (left seat), reach extends around to front within bubble window view.  In HOP, dual operation of RMA from science station and left seat

Airconditioner - roof mounted unit used in caravans, simulates life support system as well as providing controlled internal environment for year round simulations

Inflatable* - only used in HOP-U.  This takes advantage of floor provided by ute tray.  An inflatable space is stowed externally in a fold up fashion behind a door cover (not yet shown).  Inflatable could be deployed nightly (with ATV removed) for extra sleeping space - space is very limited in cabin, or permanently with some science equipment tied down externally during a special EVA.

Sample airlock - used in both vehicles, however only a limited unit available in HOP-U.  HOP-W, with larger interior space, is more suited to greater on-site analysis of samples, whereas HOP-U is capable only of simple prelim analysis.  In both cases, sample airlock is incoporated into the dust room and adjacent to the RMA.

Living arrangements* - each vehicle uses a portable cassette toilet.  Bedding is provided by a fold-up stretcher.  HOP-W provides sleeping for 4 (two standard airmattresses and two seats) while HOP-U provides a single (tight) double stretcher supported on mounting points within the bubble cabin (however use of the inflatable can provide very comfortable sleeping for 2-3).

* denotes features wholly or partially unique to HOP following literature review and current rover design work around the world.  Some of these, such as the suitport have been demonstrated elsewhere (e.g. NASA Ames), but not incorporated into a Mars rover in the way done here.  Others (such as the tray mounted inflatable) I've not seen before.

Design Philosophy
-----------------

Small is good - This is in fact what led me to a utility solution.  I want to see how compact the cabin space can be made for productive sorties.  Where others have sought to grow the volume to fit more, I have worked the other way.  Following the military approach, free space is minimised, every space is used.  This design approach also simulates the design process for a real Mars rover where every cubic centimeter/gram must be accounted for.  I'm also working on the basis that the hab will provide suitable living volume to maintain meantal health.

The internal volume in HOP-U is restricted especially by the dust room.  There are a number of conceivable options for the dust room structurally.  Since it need not necessarily have rigid walls, a clear flexible material incorporating zippers could be used.  The use of rigid dust room walls and suitports allows us to test two design approaches - no airlock with full cabin depressurisation, and an airlock allowing one or more crewmembers to remain inside during EVA periods.

Multi-functionality - the utility approach because it provides maximum capability, including carrying an unpressurised vehicle (ATV), inflatable space, and good sample stowage capacity.  Most importantly, it is a "work" vehicle that can be used as a transport truck and could conceivably be fitted with a variety of tools (such as a central pivoting excavation arm).

Minimise modifications to operational systems of base vehicle.  For example, while rotation of the steering column upwards would be preferred to make better use of cabin volume, I'm trying to avoid mods like this that would add time and cost to construction.    The selection of the base vehicle is based on the following two desirable features - 4wd, van-mounted engine.  Some additions will be highly desirable and doable (e.g. additional fuel tank), but overall I've tried to basically add a new cabin rather than significantly change the vehicle operational systems.

Design first for Mars, then compromise for Earth.  This is a vehicle designed for Mars - all features are justifiable as analogues for Mars operations.

Provide a platform that can be improved over time.  I have not yet spent any signficant time on some vehicle subsystems (such as radio comms), assuming that many of these can be retro-fitted.  However, the layout of most subsystems has been incorporated into the basic design.  The most mportant thing is to get a working platform up and running.

The overall architecture is intended to partly resemble elements of the Apollo Lunar Module, particularly the flat facetted external surfaces.  The overall look will always be subjective depending on the designer, I think the combination of the LM-like faces and the bubble window make for an interesting approach.

The real Mars rover _cannot_ be designed without knowledge of the packing volume and weight constraints.  What we can do is explore design features and approaches that can be incorporated when the iteartive mission design process actually begins.  An important consideration in HOP-W was, nevertheless to minimise the overall vehicle dimensions for the desired internal spaces and functionality (coincidentally in line with the original specification for the international rover initiative which required that the vehicle fit into a C-130 cargo hold), and the overall height was restricted.  I have been forced, however, in HOP-U to raise the overall height to include the airconditioner and provide adeqaute space for donning elastic suits.  Marsupial vehicles will, initially at least, be used in Australia without airdrops or sea transport, although future vehicles may need to consider these practical limits if, for example, Antarctic simulation work is undertaken.

There are probably others, that's all I can recall right now :)

Construction
------------

There a number of major items (candidate vendors identified and costed) including:

 - twin sports seats
 - electric winch
 - airconditioner
 - upsized tyres (from 15 in to 16 in rims), 5 off
 - custom acryllic bubble window
 - portable cassette toilet

Many of these are around AU$1,000 - AU$2,000 each.  An important part of detailed design remaining is inclusion of new structural elements (e.g. beams and walls).  I won't know what the construction of the these elements costs until I've completed the detailed drawings.  I will be hoping I can find a 4WD modification shop or caravan manufacturer to do the works, but can't solicit interest without a final drawing and budget estimate (argh!).

Operation
---------

HOP-U is designed for a crew of two but could carry 4 if pushed in an emergency.  An EVA requires both or none (buddy system).  EVA prep involves donning MCP suits, which requires headspace for squeezing into up to 6 restrictive elastic layers.  Life support backpacks are then donned, clear dome helmets locked on.  Both crewmembers then open suitport doors and climb into the back of their dust overalls, the doors are closed and they detach from ports.  Portable life support is activated.  The entire interior is depressurised, with suit life support checks.  EVA is then commenced by opening the main egress door on the left rear side, and climbing down steps/ladder (not yet shown in drawings) to ground.

However, use of the RMA and sample airlock, together with a high visibility bubble window reduces EVA demands (how much, only field simulation will tell!).  The RMA specified in these drawings is intended for precision manipulation with a limited carrying capacity.  I can see a possible need for a crane arm to make the best use of the utility tray, however I have not included this in the current draft to reduce budget requirements.  The RMA could be used for light loads (say <100 kg).

Having given much thought to the often-discussed concept of hard-docking the rover with the hab, I've concluded on balance the benefits gained would not justify the complexity and weight of the necessary docking system.  Although I think proper selection of door size/shape for conformal mating could alleviate the problem of alignment on an uneven Martian surface, and it would obviously be nice to return to the hab after a long, tiring sorty to simply "back up and lock in", I think a final EVA will probably be needed anway to transfer samples to the hab or a sample storage area and to generally "clean up" - and during this it would be possible to reverse the rover to within a small distance (~1 m) and externally connect a fold-up walkway with rails and a flexible pressurised tunnel to a hab door, then to either return to the rover directly and enter the hab via the tunnel, or else enter the hab via a second door and access the rover.

I've included two doors in both vehicles.  This is for functionality and safety.  The door shape is a rectangle that requires stooping but which should allow a suited crewmember to pass readily.  I have decided against using a "standard" ISS 1.25 m square door, partly because of width restrictions imposed by the base vehicle.

HOP-U contains a hinged floor panel that folds over the toilet, allowing easier passage through the right rear door.  This door is slightly smaller than the selected standard size to fit the overall design and since normal operations would see it used by shirtsleeved crewmembers who require a smaller .  It is intended for detachable connection with inflatbles (e.g. tray top inflatable and hab docking tunnel). 
