

                 1       INTRODUCTION
                 My name is Jason Hoogland, I'm a Doctoral student at the University of
                 Queensland in the Centre for Hypersonics.  My PhD is focussed on studying
                 aspects of the aerodynamics and heat transfer on atmospheric entry heat shields
                 such as those used in the Viking and Pathfinder missions.  I've been educated
                 as a physicists and as a mechanical engineer and I am passionate about the role
                 Australia can and should play in space, and the Mars Society is something I'm
                 involved with in what little spare time I have at the moment!

                 Firstly, I'd like to thank Guy Murphy and his Melbourne team for bringing us
                 together for what I hope will be the first of many Australian Mars Exploration
                 Conferences.  The word "Exploration" is interesting.  Perhaps, I hope, instead
                 of standing from this place and gazing up, imagining ways of exploring the Red
                 Planet, in future we may see Earth through the eyes of people on Mars, and see
                 Mars as our first step to exploring the universe.

                 The purpose of my talk today will be to outline a vision of how we in Australia
                 can make a genuine contribution to the exploration of Mars.  I can announce
                 here that an offer has been made by the Mars Society of at least US$150,000 in
                 contributions to ORC, but this will depend on local fundraising efforts and the
                 support of local benefactors and organisations who wish to see our country play
                 a part in international efforts leading to Mars.

                 What we might do in the field and ways we might raise the support, I'll get to
                 later.  Firstly, I'd like to step back and consider with you some of the many
                 special things about Mars.

                 2       MARS IS A HUMAN HARBOUR
                 Mars appears to be the only other planet in our neighbourhood capable of human
                 habitation.  If we can carry with us an energy source and hydrogen, pretty much
                 all the requirements for life can be satisfied.  Living on Mars will initially
                 be a great challenge, but it's the only conceivable harbour for us in the event
                 of a catastrophic degradation of the conditions that allow life on Earth.  The
                 chance of another major asteroid impact over a geological timescale is all but
                 guaranteed - in fact the United Kingdom recently committed several hundred
                 million Australian dollars to tracking potentially hazardous Near Earth
                 Objects.   The chances of simultaneous impacts on Earth and Mars seem very
                 small.  One realistic aspect of the recent movies Deep Impact and Armageddon
                 (one of the few, I might add!) was that we really could suddenly find ourselves
                 facing the unthinkable.  Wouldn't you want a lot more than just a bunch of
                 all-American heroes in a tin-can Space Shuttle between you and oblivion? - I'd
                 want an insurance policy, I'd want Mars!

                 Many advocates of Mars view it as a first step toward the spread of our
                 civilisation amongst the stars.  These ideas have been powerfully disseminated
                 through the science fiction novel and movie.  Although I wouldn't call myself a
                 science fiction buff (is that safe to say at a Mars Conference?), the genre has
                 had a profound impact on the way I and my generation imagine humans in space. 
                 The possibilities have been created in our mind, the seeds planted and a level
                 of expectation has been set.  Inevitably there is frustration and impatience
                 that the worlds of economics and politics do not so simply succumb to
                 imagination.  Nevertheless, there is a sign in our collective consciousness
                 saying "This way for the Universe, first stop Mars".

                 So Mars is a human harbour.  Within one or two centuries, Mars could be
                 "terraformed" as a second home for humanity.  It would keep our DNA relatively
                 safe from catastrophic collision, and would be a first step to sending it
                 around the Universe.

                 3       MARS IS A GREAT KEY OF KNOWLEDGE
                 If you don't buy the human expansionist line, there are plenty of other reasons
                 for going to Mars.  Mars is undoubtedly a treasure chest of knowledge about the
                 way our own Earth functions.  The very limited contact we have had with Venus
                 and Mars in the last 50 years has already encouraged research into a range of
                 geological and atmospheric processes important on Earth.  I will leave others
                 more qualified at this gathering to explain the comparative science.  But let
                 there be no mistake, when we go to Mars, we'll be doing it not just for future
                 generations, but selfishly to learn a great deal about our own Blue Planet.  I
                 often think the potential of Mars as a great key of knowledge is
                 under-emphasised.

                 Every time humans have expanded into a new environment, a great leap in
                 knowledge appears to have followed.  This has often occurred subtly, without
                 fanfare, indeed it is often difficult to quantify the gains. If it is true that
                 such territorial expansion feeds great intellectual undercurrents, then  today
                 we witness a fascinating nexus in human history.  Today, humans have global
                 mobility.  There are certainly places on the surface where we have not been,
                 and places deep which remain formidable obstacles, yet the expansion has
                 ceased.  Where is the frontier?  Men have been to the Moon.  The new frontier
                 is Mars.

                 4       MARS MAY TELL US THAT LIFE IS UNIVERSAL
                 Finding life elsewhere could be utterly profound.  It would have a great deal
                 of scientific meaning, and would give us a great deal of spiritual meaning.  I
                 could diverge for much longer on this fascinating topic, but will defer to our
                 eminent guest Professor Walter who can speak authoritatively on the matter.

                 What I can say is that robots are unlikely to give us definitive answers to the
                 search in the foreseeable future.  Put simply, the predictions of so-called
                 futurists of robots "just around the corner" that can do your homework or take
                 your kids to school were wildly over-optimistic.  The basic problem is that our
                 brain is very, very clever, ironically so much so that we're still such a long
                 way from really understanding it.  Tele-operated robots are useful tools, to be
                 sure, and we'll inevitably see more and more sophisticated tele-robots with
                 limited autonomy for Mars exploration.  At the end of the day, however, the
                 intelligence, mobility and dexterity required in undertaking the combinations
                 of actions and decisions required for properly exploring Mars for evidence of
                 life will simply depend on us getting flexible, adaptable, curious humans to
                 the surface.  If Mars is to yield a momentous insight into the presence of life
                 in the universe, only sending people to the Red Planet will do.

                 5       MARS IS THE ULTIMATE CHALLENGE
                 Mars can be done.  By this I mean sending "humans to Mars", the only real way
                 to capitalise on the benefits.  Plans have been drafted, analyses undertaken,
                 technology proven for the last 30 years.  But it is not an easy challenge, and
                 it is not without cost.  No matter how badly we or others as individuals would
                 will us to Mars, it will only happen with a confluence of forces, not least of
                 which is the disarmingly simple equation


                 Benefits of Human Missions* > Costs of Human Missions + Risks

                 *actual and perceived

                 The main factors on the benefit side are likely to be (a) political and (b)
                 economic.  Only nations will be able to mobilise the necessary resources, at
                 least for the next few decades.  The decision will largely fall to the leaders
                 of those nations capable, and they will be influenced by many historical and
                 contemporary issues.  For them, the decision to commit to Mars will be mainly
                 about raising short term political capital or minimising short term political
                 damage, but they will also be seeking a legacy.  Ultimately the decision will
                 hinge on the long term economic benefits for their nation.  A ticket to Mars
                 will take the participants even farther ahead economically of those nations who
                 miss the boat.

                 For this reason, once one nation makes a serious commitment to Mars, I believe
                 we will see several nations lining up, recognising the benefits of being first.
                  There is something magical about being first.  I envisage initially a race to
                 Mars, in some respects not dissimilar to the race to the moon.  I believe we
                 will see a steady ramping up throughout this decade amongst all the national
                 space agencies with plans for sending humans beyond earth orbit.  This is
                 already occurring.  The technological lead held by the United States in the
                 space arena, once vast, is steadily dwindling.

                 It is no secret that this lead on the one hand acted (and was deliberately
                 used!) to discourage other nations from strengthening their own space
                 programmes, while on the other hand created a sense of complacency and a lack
                 of purpose within the US.  But others are catching up.  Initially, the first
                 real move will be made by the US.  In only the last few days, NASA
                 Administrator Dan Goldin has given one of his most strident public endorsements
                 for a human mission by 2020.  It is most likely organisations like Europe's ESA
                 and Japan's NASDA would join with the US in a co-operative endeavour.  

                 I am not sure that we will see the rationalisation between the "West" and
                 "East" that was forced in the case of the International Space Station as a
                 result of the collapse of the Soviet Union.  It seems likely we will see
                 serious efforts on the part of space faring nations such as Russia, China and
                 India to mount Mars missions.  These countries are capable of sending robotic
                 vehicles to the planet, and probably will send a raft of them, although should
                 they want a piece of the bigger prize, to send the first humans, it would most
                 likely be a consolidated bid.  They would need to overcome old rivalries and
                 festering sores, but the stakes would be extremely high.

                 The two rival camps, consisting mainly of the US, Europe and Japan on the one
                 hand, and Russia, China and India on the other, might seek ways of combining
                 efforts as the costs grew.  A single global project would seem the logical
                 outcome, but logic does not always dictate geo-politics.  The result will very
                 much depend on the politico-economic issues and personalities of the time.  It
                 is conceivable that two "teams" might race to the Red Planet.  Competition
                 would probably increase the risk thresholds accepted by participant nations,
                 however one could argue that a race is a desirable scenario.  I would tend to
                 see things this way.

                 But alas, this is a topic on which I could diverge at length, and it is time
                 now to consider how Australia can be involved in this great endeavour.

                 6       AUSTRALIA'S ROLE IN MARS
                 Australia is an economically small but wealthy "middling" power.  We are a
                 nation of sceptics.  This serves us well in the realm of science.  It serves us
                 very well for Mars science, where healthy scepticism is often in short supply.

                 For example, its almost as if there are in fact two Mars's.  Let me start with
                 what I shall call "The Press Release Mars".  It is the Mars we have grown up
                 with, the one in our school text books, the red billiard ball that follows that
                 perfect ellipse with all the other planets around the Sun.  Its the one
                 reinforced every day with a barrage of NASA press releases.  It is the one
                 which had vast ancient oceans of water, where evidence of life is begging to be
                 found.  This Mars is a programme, a budget line-item that must be spent this
                 fiscal or else you'll lose it.  It is not a Mars created with malicious intent,
                 but merely by bureaucratic mis-intent.

                 Then there is what I shall call "The Real Mars".  It's the one with a surface
                 area equal to the total land area on Earth, where only a handful of very
                 simplistic robots have landed.  In between these landing sites are vast
                 stretches of utterly unknown terrain.  We have photographs and to be sure can
                 learn a lot from our remote measurements, but it's a place, not a programme. 
                 No one owns it (yet!) and its very hard to get to.  One thing we can say
                 definitely about the Real Mars is that we cannot really say very much
                 definitely about it at all!  We know there is water frozen in the permafrost,
                 but have liquid oceans, potential sources of life, ever existed?  The truth is
                 no one is sure, except apparently the NASA Media Office.

                 Yet we recognise that even the world's largest civilian space programme, with a
                 budget of at least AU$26 billion annually, must somehow maintain its relevance
                 with its own public.  Hence it is important that small advanced nations such as
                 Australia properly scrutinise controversial hypotheses that emerge in the
                 exploration of Mars.  This is one way we can be involved in understanding the
                 Red Planet.  The data collected by robotic missions to Mars is truly vast and
                 is realistically beyond the capacity of the major agencies to study completely.
                  There is a need for more Australian planetary scientists.  These workers can
                 serve the national interest by improving our understanding of terrestrial
                 processes through comparative research.  As custodians of a planetary
                 continent, surely we would do well to better understand Mars.

                 There is healthy scepticism and there is unhealthy scepticism.  The unhealthy
                 kind, I'll call it the "invisible scepticism", is that which holds back your
                 thinking without you even realising it.  It limits your horizons even before
                 you have a chance to explore them.  Now this isn't a problem confined just to
                 Australia, but we certainly have more than our fair share.  One manifestation
                 is that Australians rarely lead.  We're happy to follow.  Over the last two
                 hundred years, this hasn't appeared to greatly diminish our standard of living.
                  We have been fortunate enough to rely on our physical resources.

                 But if there is a lesson from the last several decades, it is that technology
                 and ideas are gaining the ascendancy.  We have an opportunity now to exploit
                 our natural assets and to be, if not the first, then a leader in the most
                 important exploration initiative of our lifetime.  We can begin to redress a
                 lost opportunity.  For nearly a decade, Australia was used as a launch platform
                 for some of the world's most advanced rocket technology.

                 Woomera provided us with infrastructure, expertise and a foundation on which to
                 be a world leader in space.  We will never send people to Mars on our own, but
                 we can certainly develop space capabilities to serve the nation, one so heavily
                 dependent on space assets.  I would argue strongly that if were to make a
                 national commitment to space, then it should include a major component for
                 interplanetary exploration.  Nothing can inspire our youth more effectively to
                 pursue careers in science and engineering.

                 In addition, I would like to see us exploiting some of our strengths in
                 terrestrial scientific and engineering activities to planetary surface niche
                 technology development for export.  Indeed, this is really the only basis for
                 convincing economic rationalists to support sending or contributing to space
                 vehicles that travel millions of kilometres for reasons they cannot understand.
                  For this reason I will be establishing an MSA Technology Partner scheme
                 whereby we will seek to co-operate with R&D programmes of business seeking
                 space applications for their innovations and/or who wish to be associated with
                 a world class programme of Mars analogue research and testing.

                 The opportunity "lost" in the early 70's, I would submit, is often over-played.
                  Australians were involved, but in a limited way, and our lack of a space
                 programme is probably part of a wider obligation as part of our regional
                 defence, as much as a lack of political will.  Unfortunately, I fear that with
                 Woomera in living memory, and so many voices having cried for so long for a
                 return to the "good old days", any national space programme to emerge in the
                 near future would be something of a "resurrection", running the risk of a
                 limited focus on small earth orbiting applications satellites that go nowhere,
                 teach us little, and fail to extend us.  This is why I believe we need a force
                 such as Mars Society Australia, undertaking constructive space exploration
                 related activities, making a case for a progressive and visionary space
                 programme, should such a miracle ever eventuate!

                 So, if there is no national commitment to Mars or indeed to space generally at
                 present, what can we do?  We have no choice but to undertake private activity. 
                 This is characterised primarily by volunteer effort and relatively small
                 budgets, which seems incongruous in a field of sky high ambitions and costs. 
                 Actually, it is a rather daunting prospect.  But this is a case where it is
                 necessary to restrain our unhealthy scepticism and explore the possibilities
                 and the benefits.

                 Actually, the entire premise of Mars Society technical activity worldwide is
                 that the resources to get to the Red Planet already exist in the hearts and hip
                 pockets of the millions, perhaps tens or hundreds of millions of people around
                 the world who would wish us to make the journey.  We simply need to demonstrate
                 that there is a group who can get them there.  The philosophy behind our work
                 is the "Theory of Escalating Accomplishment":

                        Phase 1 consists of ground based Mars analogue research activities to support
                 Mars analogue science, mission planning simulation, technology development.  It
                 will make Mars more real for more people.  The emphasis on outreach in this
                 phase is very high, since for most people Mars is an abstract concept with
                 little value to their everyday lives.  This can only be changed by providing
                 opportunities for anyone to participate in technically credible ground analogue
                 activities, for journalists to witness this and tell the world.  Phase 1 is
                 supported by donations from visionary benefactors of the order of US$1,000,000.

                        Phase 2 will see us take the first steps to Mars.  Initially this will
                 involve secondary payloads on mainly publicly funded spacecraft, building the
                 credibility and profile to mobilise commercial funding from entrepreneurial
                 organisations seeing advertising potential and longer term profit in Mars
                 operations.  The spacecraft will be robotic and will become ever more
                 sophisticated with miniaturisation and new materials,  collecting for us pieces
                 of the Mars puzzle.  They will crawl on the surface, drilling, collecting and
                 returning samples, helping us understand the geology and possible biology of
                 Mars.  They will also fly through the thin Martian air, giving us global
                 coverage and detailed geomorphologic, resource and climatic information.  The
                 funding necessary for this phase increases by 1 to 2 orders of magnitude,
                 beginning at US$10,000,000 and climbing to US$100,000,000.

                        Phase 3 would see the first private or partly private footsteps on Mars. 
                 With the growing publicity and entertainment value of Mars missions becoming
                 evident and reductions in the cost of getting into space finally being
                 realised, the Red Planet will come to be seen as the ultimate adventure
                 destination, just as Everest and the Poles attracted wealthy thrill seekers in
                 the late 19th, and early 20th centuries.  Phase 3 will require further
                 increases in funding of 1 to 2 orders of magnitude, from US$1 billion to US$100
                 billion.  Such human missions could be supported by ultra-wealthy individuals,
                 organisations and/or by international lotteries.

                        Phase 4 would see us redressing what some regard as the tragedy of Apollo and
                 opening up a beachhead for a continual and growing human presence on Mars. 
                 Only national governments would be able to mobilise the more than US$1 trillion
                 that might be needed to establish and fund a long term commitment to a human
                 Mars presence, however Phases 1-3 will have created the conditions necessary to
                 encourage such a political decision.  By that time, the Red Planet will be seen
                 as a second home for humanity, a place critical to the future of our current
                 Blue Planet.  Mars would likely be considered analogous to Antarctica, an
                 important continent for understanding the health of the Earth, and would see
                 scientific bases occupied by intrepid researchers, including funding
                 supplementation from wealthy tourists undertaking support duties.  Phase 4 will
                 see intense debate regarding "terraforming" or the transforming of Mars into an
                 Earth-like environment.  In fact terraforming in some senses may begin with the
                 first human footstep, but when the challenges of large scale terraforming are
                 quantified, it will be necessary to face tough ethical and economic questions.

                 Such an overview is necessarily simplistic, and there are certain factors
                 overlooked, particularly the economic and geo-political decisions made by the
                 major space fairing governments (such as privatisation and military utilisation
                 of space), yet these phases map a broad thrust for the Mars Society.

                 Our contribution to Phase 1 is Operation Red Centre.  I'd like to take this
                 opportunity to formally outline the Mars Society Australia technical programme
                 for Operation Red Centre.

                 ORC consists of five projects:

                 Mars-Oz
                 The international Mars Society has established a research station on the arctic
                 Devon Island.  The facility is designed to be "flight-like", similar to the
                 kind of planetary entry, descent and landing habitats used in leading
                 humans-to-Mars mission plans.  These allow realistic simulations, refining
                 mission planning.  Three additional stations around the world are planned as
                 part of the Mars-x project, including the Mars Australian Research Station
                 (Mars-Oz).  Mars-Oz will allow local and international members to help answer
                 critical questions related to human Mars missions and will raise awareness of
                 the opportunities awaiting at the Red Planet.

                 Marsupial
                 In 2000 Mars Society Australia was one of three international groups awarded
                 seed funding to develop a "flight-like" Mars rover vehicle to undertake unique
                 mission planning research.  Project Marsupial is constructing a family of
                 analogue vehicles that will help with the design of future Mars rovers.  The
                 Human Operations Prototype (HOP) is the first vehicle in the series.  The HOP
                 is based on a modified van chassis and focusses on human operations research,
                 with a view to next generation electric hybrid vehicles.

                 SAFMARS
                 Mars Society Australia is working in cooperation with the Australian Space
                 Research Institute (ASRI) to put in place the Mars Society's first orbital
                 capability in 2002.  This will form a crucial link in the Store and Forward
                 Mars Analogue Research System, a global communications network for Mars
                 analogue researchers.  SAFMARS will allow email communication between isolated
                 locations including Mars Society research stations and the internet.  Members
                 of the public will be able to communicate with Mars Society field crews and the
                 system will allow monitoring and control of Mars Society research assets
                 anywhere in the world, year-round.

                 Jarntimarra
                 Mars Society Australia is developing a valuable electronic database containing
                 comprehensive information on Australian sites of interest to Mars researchers
                 around the world.  Project Jarntimarra (Jarntimarra means "star" in the
                 aboriginal Warlpiri language of central Australia) will also plan and execute
                 field operations in support of Operation Red Centre.  Jarntimarra involves
                 experts in various scientific disciplines including geology and microbiology,
                 as well as outdoor and 4WD enthusiasts.

                 Mars Skin
                 Analogue simulation depends on subjecting crew members to the same kinds of
                 constraints expected for human crews on the surface of Mars.  A key element of
                 Operation Red Centre is therefore a Mars analogue surface suit.  Project Mars
                 Skin will apply the latest research in such systems to develop realistic Mars
                 suits for use in analogue research activities.  There is a particular focus on
                 the Mechanical Counter-Pressure (MCP) suit concept, and we plan to work with
                 the the original NASA designers of the MCP to test analogue systems in
                 Australia.

                 The common themes underpinning ORC include:

                        The problems and questions surrounding human Mars missions are numerous
                 enough to provide a fertile hunting ground for any research programme,
                        The focus is on physical deliverables and on desert operations.  Firstly,
                 this is because visible action, the kind crystallised around engineering
                 activities and remote field trips, motivates and mobilises.  Secondly, physical
                 assets and operations are useful and often necessary for supporting field
                 science.  Thirdly, our goal is partly to convince the wider public here and
                 overseas of the value of Mars exploration - my favourite saying is "to make
                 Mars more real for more people".  By portraying Mars as a fascinating and
                 valuable place, rather than just a programme, we can make it more tangible and
                 visceral for ordinary people, helping us influence the political process,
                        It is designed to encourage a move toward an Australian space agency, one
                 with a specific brief explicitly including planetary exploration.  In this
                 sense, it is deliberately designed to focus on planetary surface activities,
                 allowing other organisations (e.g. the Australian Space Research Institute,
                 ASRI) to undertake flight related activities with a view to a future, visionary
                 integrated national space effort,
                        It is deliberately limited to a handful of projects, each of which, being
                 analogue in nature, can be undertaken with limited resources.  These projects
                 have been selected because they address the major elements for any integrated
                 Mars analogue research programme, also creating a platform for the application
                 of valuable science and secondary hardware R&D.

                 These projects are at various stages of advancement.  Project Marsupial, the
                 most mature, has provided some valuable insights into the nature of the
                 challenges to be faced.  One lesson is that you can succeed without much money
                 or without experienced personnel, but don't expect to get far without both at
                 the same time!  We're hoping to redress this, and our inexperienced team
                 members are learning quickly.

                 ORC projects desperately need personnel with skills and experience.  There are
                 thousands of highly skilled and talented trades people and professionals in
                 Australia.  Given an understanding of the nature of the opportunities we offer
                 and of the credible and convincing imperative that we should and can contribute
                 to Mars mission research, I'm convinced many of these people would jump at the
                 chance to be part of this great journey.  And I want to show the world that
                 Australians have got what it takes be part of this journey.  We need your help
                 to find them!

                 Is there private Mars research being undertaken anywhere else?  You bet!  The
                 Mars Society is a US not for profit organisation founded in Boulder, Colorado
                 in August 1998.  The first Convention attracted around 700 people from NASA
                 research centres, major universities and over 40 countries.  These included
                 scientists, engineers, designers, teachers and writers.  At least two
                 Australians attended and the seeds of Mars Society Australia were sown.   Over
                 the week of the convention various papers were presented on a wide range of
                 topics, and there were panel discussions and debates.

                 The evolution of the Mars Society is an interesting story in itself.  Its
                 beginnings can be traced to a broad swathe of people (including NASA personnel)
                 in the US and internationally disappointed with Nixon's winding back of the
                 manned space programme following Apollo.  There was a great deal of
                 disappointment that a goal openly mooted, manned Mars missions, had been
                 abandoned.

                 Various robotic spacecraft tantalised Mars advocates, starting with Mariner and
                 the twin Viking spacecraft.  Efforts for many years were diverted to Space
                 Shuttle development, reminiscent of the current drain created by the ISS, and
                 Mars seemed largely forgotten.  As part of a collection of initiatives which
                 effectively bankrupted the Soviet Union, George Bush, Snr. proposed the Space
                 Exploration Initiative (SEI) in the late 80's.  A stated goal was to send
                 humans to Mars.

                 NASA did its sums and, based on mission planning dating back to Von Braun in
                 the 50's, and announced "Mr President, you might like to take a seat...  That
                 human mission to Mars you wanted us to look into, well have you got a spare
                 US$550 billion?" (in today's value!).  To put this in perspective, the current
                 Australian GDP is estimated at around US$450 billion.  The equivalent of an
                 entire nation would have to be mortgaged to go to Mars!  The proposal was
                 quickly forgotten beside other priorities such as the Strategic Defence
                 Initiative, and ironically Space Station Alpha.

                 But Mars would not go away.  Around this time, there was murmured scrutiny of
                 NASA's sums.  The SEI proposal was based on assembly of gigantic spacecraft in
                 Low Earth Orbit that would carry their return fuel to Mars in the Von Braun
                 manner.  Crew would stay on the surface for only around 1 month.  Remarkably,
                 only one contractor, Martin Marietta (now part of Lockheed Martin), chose to
                 seriously pursue the challenge of introducing improved engineering discipline
                 into the mission design.  What emerged is now recognised as a benchmark mission
                 concept - Mars Direct.  The lead engineer at Martin Marietta on the project was
                 Dr Robert Zubrin.

                 Robert was a former high school teacher who decided he could have more of an
                 impact outside the classroom.  He returned to study degrees in Nuclear
                 Engineering and Astrodynamics and landed a job at Martin Marietta.  Working
                 outside the NASA bureaucracy, constrained by too many cross-purposes (e.g. use
                 of a Space Station Alpha as an assembly platform for Mars missions), Zubrin and
                 David Baker questioned all the initial assumptions and revisited technology
                 options that had been rejected by NASA on the basis of mission risk or
                 technical maturity.

                 As part of this, they drew from a list of at least one dozen major and minor
                 technological and operational options that completely altered the nature of the
                 mission.  Mars Direct was longer - with 7 month deep space transit legs and up
                 to 18 months on the surface.  The spacecraft were smaller, sent more
                 frequently.  They were launched directly into the Mars transit trajectory from
                 the Earth's surface, with no on-orbit assembly, a key stumbling block of the
                 NASA SEI plan.  But the coup de' grace was the use of In Situ Resource
                 Utilisation (ISRU).  By employing a nuclear power source, and taking two key
                 items: several tonnes of hydrogen gas and a methane production plant (based on
                 a process used since the Gaslight era), Mars Direct could substantially save on
                 Earth launch mass and complexity and make its return fuel whilst on the surface
                 using only carbon dioxide from the Martian atmosphere.

                 This was a simple but breathtaking advance.  The mission cost could be
                 decreased by an order of magnitude.  Understandably Robert wasn't the favourite
                 person of those who had developed the NASA plan, and he has since left Martin
                 Marietta to become a successful author and establish his own small business. 
                 Around 1994, NASA adopted the ISRU philosophy and the current Design Reference
                 Mission (DRM), at version 3.0, shares an uncanny resemblance to Mars Direct!

                 During the 80's and the 90's a group of university students gathered regularly,
                 amongst them current NASA researchers Pascal Lee, Carol Stoker and Chris McKay.
                  They called themselves the "Mars Underground", organising a series of "Case
                 for Mars" conferences.  At the same time, Robert had ascended to a prominent
                 role within a leading space advocacy group, the National Space Society (NSS),
                 which has an Australian branch, the National Space Society of Australia (NSSA).
                  Robert became frustrated with an NSS pre-occupation with the moon and was a
                 driving force behind the formation of the Mars Society in 1998. He has been
                 largely responsible for raising around US$1 million from various sources,
                 including filmmaker James Cameron, for Mars Society Phase 1 activity.

                 This phase commenced with establishment of an analogue lander/habitat facility
                 in Haughton Crater on Devon Island in the Canadian high arctic in 2000.  Devon
                 emerged as an interesting analogue site when Pascal Lee began investigating
                 areas in southern Canada that had been used for Apollo analogue work.  He
                 proposed the Haughton Mars Project (HMP), a now annual international field
                 exercise where planetary, atmospheric and life scientists undertake Mars
                 analogue research and mission technology testing activities.

                  
                 Figure 1 The Flashline MARS on Devon Island, Canada

                 F-MARS or Flashline Mars Arctic Research Station (named after the major
                 sponsor), presented a major deployment challenge using C-130 airdrops provided
                 by the US Marines.  One of these failed, rendering floor components and
                 construction tools unserviceable.  The team, involving Robert Zubrin, Pascal
                 Lee and Canadian internet entrepreneur Marc Boucher, persevered and improvised,
                 and were able to successfully commission the facility.  Total cost for
                 establishing F-MARS is estimated at around US$130,000.  There continues to be
                 close co-operation between the Society and the HMP, and the field season to
                 commence shortly will see the facility occupied continuously for 6-8 weeks by
                 rotating crews selected from 250 candidates worldwide.  I'm pleased to report
                 that one of these people includes an Australian-born geophysicist, Katie Quinn.

                  
                 Figure 2 Australian born Katie Quinn testing a Mars Society analogue suit

                 A second habitat unit is currently being constructed for deployment in a South
                 Western US location later this year.  This is part of a wider effort to
                 establish a string of analogue bases around the world, to take advantage of
                 different operational seasons and conditions.  One of these is of course
                 planned for Australia (Mars-Oz), the other for Europe.

                 Other important activities internationally include the Mars Society pressurised
                 rover initiative, and the development of analogue suits.  Following a
                 competitive grant process in 2000, three teams:

                        University of Toronto/MIT,
                        University of Michigan, and
                        Mars Society Australia

                 were awarded seed funding of US$5,000 to begin design and construction of a
                 pressurised analogue rover.  The prime objective was to develop a credible
                 vehicle in a short time frame.  The North American teams are working to produce
                 vehicles for use with the US habitat, MSA will operate HOP in our own desert
                 locations.

                 A key objective of Project Marsupial is to use HOP as a first step to
                 development of a family of vehicles leading to a flight-like rover technology
                 demonstrator incorporating components from local suppliers, in a vain similar
                 to the Access Australia passenger vehicle co-ordinated by the CSIRO.  Human
                 pressurised rovers are an essential component of Mars mission architecture -
                 for example NASA has budgeted around US$1 billion for development as part of
                 the Design Reference Mission.  There is hence considerable scope to contribute
                 design approaches and export technology if we can get in early enough.  Not to
                 mention the ways that this work can inspire and motivate Australians.  There
                 are several benefits to be gained from development of a high fidelity
                 all-terrain exploration platform, which I may have time to explain on another
                 occasion.

                  
                 Figure 3 Overview of Wombat, the first Marsupial design

                 Some primary subsystems in a Mars pressurised rover include:
                 1.      Power,
                 2.      Drive,
                 3.      Carriage,
                 4.      Control,
                 5.      Information Management,
                 6.      Communications,
                 7.      Ancillary equipment
                 8.      Cabin arrangement,
                 9.      Safety
                 HOP will focus on the final five subsystems by building upon an existing
                 chassis/drive/engine/control system.  In this case, a second-hand Mitsubishi
                 4WD van will provide the platform.  We'll create an external shell and the
                 design will test ways of arranging the cabin to best suit the duty.  To test
                 other things such as information management, communications, and ancillary
                 equipment, we'll need to raise much more money and in-kind support, and again
                 we need your help.  For only AU$50,000 I believe we can build a world-class,
                 well designed and field-ready platform to make unique contributions to Mars
                 analogue science and simulation for mission planning and as a first step to a
                 more ambitious demonstrator with export potential.

                 Despite challenges and hard-earned lessons, I expect HOP will be ready around
                 November this year if we can raise the necessary support.  We hope it will form
                 part of a major exhibition on life in the universe, to be seen by tens (perhaps
                 hundreds) of thousands of people in major Australian capital cities later this
                 year.

                 7       HOW CAN YOU HELP US?

                 The first phase of Mars Society technical activity requires your visionary
                 contribution.  The most important requirements for Operation Red Centre are (in
                 order of priority):

                 1.      Local Resource Support.  In order to mount ORC with an acceptable level of
                 scientific and engineering integrity, we require AU$100,000 - AU$300,000 in
                 cash and in-kind support during 2001 and 2002.  I expect international
                 involvement in the programme, and it is essential to match contributions from
                 the US based Mars Society with local funding to attract the overseas
                 participation sought.  I can announce here that an offer has been made by the
                 Mars Society of at least US$150,000 in contributions to ORC, but this will
                 depend on local fundraising efforts and the support of local benefactors and
                 organisations who wish to see our country play a part in international efforts
                 leading to Mars.

                 2.      Highly motivated, skilled and experienced technicians and professionals.  We
                 need the right people to help us mount an integrated Mars analogue programme. 
                 We need "can-do" people.  The capabilities necessary are abundant in Australia
                 and can be applied from skills and experience gained in practically any other
                 sphere or discipline.  But we must make these people aware of Mars and the
                 opportunities we can offer to be involved in international research activity,
                 even without experience or knowledge in space science and engineering.

                 3.      Highly driven and dynamic people to create a new Mars Society Australia
                 organisation.  There are many ways MSA could be enhanced, and this is essential
                 to attracting more support and members.

                 8       REALITY CHECK
                 I was recently asked "My 5 year old wants to go to Mars - what shall I tell
                 them?  Surely it is not possible for an Australian?". 

                 Well, your child can go to Mars.  It will not be an easy path, and they'll need
                 a good dose of determination and good fortune.  They will need to work very
                 hard.  But if they really want to go, it is within their reach regardless, I
                 think, of their citizenship.  We are now citizens of the world, and if your
                 child strives to become the very best in the kinds of disciplines needed
                 initially on Mars - including geology, microbiology, climatology and
                 engineering, they will compete favourably with other hopefuls and you may one
                 day hear their words from  over 300,000,000 kilometres away!  Andy Thomas has
                 shown that an ordinary boy from Adelaide can work hard and with patiently and a
                 little luck, experience the exhilaration of space.

                 But perhaps the best way you and your child can get to Mars is to help the Mars
                 Society climb the ladder of escalating accomplishment.  History is resplendent
                 with great movements of like minded and dynamic people who have changed the
                 course of humanity, often in the face of overwhelming odds.  The first step is
                 to become a member and demonstrate your commitment to our vision.  Then, apply
                 your skills in progressing our projects and demonstrating the smaller successes
                 necessary to pursue our grander ambitions.  Then tell your friends - it's time
                 for Mars.

                 But is Mars really worth fighting for?  How can a place so distant from our
                 everyday experience really be that important?  These were exactly the same
                 questions asked by Britons in the mid 1700's when Cook's circumnavigation of
                 the world was being proposed.  The costs were high and the benefits uncertain. 
                 The lifestyle we enjoy today in Australia is partly a legacy of that visionary
                 decision to seek the unknown Great Southern land, to employ the latest
                 technology of the day in expanding horizons.  Our isolation and practical
                 common sense has fostered and tempered the same wandering spirit.

                 The truth is that Mars is right next door.  Look up toward the Southern Cross
                 on any clear night and imagine that amongst the trillions and trillions of
                 stars, and the many planets we now know exist around them, there is only one
                 place which beckons.  Of all the sand on all the beaches of the world, there is
                 but one single, solitary grain for which we are equipped to make the journey
                 when we have the will to do so.  It may be a barren place, reminding us of
                 Australia in some respects, but like our home, Mars has hidden treasures.

                 We are capable, the world is poised to go.  Australia is a rich nation that can
                 afford to make a contribution, indeed lead, and can reap the benefits.  But we
                 should not rely on our governments.  The real rewards of Mars await the people,
                 for whom the Red Planet is the gateway to a new frontier, a new beginning. 
                 They await shrewd business people who realise the profit potential arising from
                 public fascination, well before a single step is taken on the planet.  They
                 await children, who will grow up dreaming and striving and knowing a world
                 where even the most fantastic goals are not beyond their reach.
